# How We Define and Develop Emotional Intelligence

thoughtbot is continuously establishing new strategies and techniques to develop
our Emotional Intelligence values. We use these strategies and techniques to
develop our personal EQ, and are always working to uncover more.

### Task Forces

Establishing Diversity and Inclusion Task Forces has allowed individual
thoughtbotters to divide the work into smaller, more actionable areas of focus.
Diversity in collaboration yields new and synthesized strategies. Many people
find this process very rewarding, and that it provides deeper meaning to the
work we do.

### NVC

> Our survival as a species depends on our ability to recognize that our
> well-being and the well-being of others are in fact one in the same.
>
> -- Marshall B. Rosenberg, PhD, author of Nonviolent Communication

Non Violent Communication, or NVC, provides strategy and tactics for maintaining
productive communication and connection under stress. It gifts us with a
judgment free solution for reharmonizing with our values, and increases the
quality of life in the workplace. Engaging with NVC helps develop Emotional
Intelligence.

For more information, check out [the book], or visit the [Center for Non Violent
Communication].

[the book]: https://nonviolentcommunication.com/
[center for non violent communication]: https://www.cnvc.org/

### Meditation

This act of self care can clear up internal resources that we need to handle
difficult conversations. Meditation can bring us closer to our truest selves,
give a deeper insight into our emotions, and allow us to be more present when
our emotions may affect our behaviors. Meditation can also help us recover from
emotionally challenging situations, and more reliably redirect our behavior
towards a successful outcome.

### Science

EQ consists of a set of skills that can be continuously improved. There are
physical / neurological changes that take place within the human brain as one
develops the underlying personal and social competencies.

Emotional Intelligence is part of what makes us human, as it requires rational
thinking and future planning, and anticipation of future outcomes. Information
passes through our limbic system, where emotions are processed, before it
reaches the front of the brain, where our rational thoughts generate a lot of
activity. Developing Emotional Intelligence increases communication between the
rational and emotional centers of the brain.

Applying strategies to increase one's Emotional Intelligence allows the
neuroplastic properties of the brain to speed up the efficiency of improving the
skills in the future. Once the brain has been trained repeatedly to use
Emotional Intelligence strategies, the behaviors become habits and reflexes.

### Compassion Challenges

One way a person can further develop Emotional Intelligence is by seeking out
ways of helping others that are outside of one's comfort zone. By keeping an eye
out for situations where one might feel hesitant to help, a person can create
daily opportunities to develop the redirection of uncomfortable emotions to a
positive outcome. Helping others tends to increase one's own sense of empathy,
further bolstering available resources for future difficult conversations.

### Practice Identifying Emotions

Naming and labeling one's emotional states can help build higher EQ. The
practice of naming and labeling the more obvious positive emotions one feels is
one place to start. From there, one can try and identify complex nuances of the
emotions one is already familiar with. Identifying and naming negative emotions
may feel more challenging, but it helps one become more familiar with them, and
allows one to begin planning a positive redirection more quickly.

Counting and tracking the number of times one experiences each emotion is
another way to exercise the EQ muscles. To enhance this activity, one can
reflect on which had the strongest affects on our behaviors that day. Focusing
on pure observation, without judging right or wrongness, can produce great EI
skill benefits.

### Hiring

We aim to integrate our values from the start of our hiring pipeline.

### Interviews

Occasional interviews about individual people's thoughts and feelings on our
EI/EQ efforts can provide new opportunities for improvement.

### Diversity and Inclusion Training

We recommend having a workplace culture where D&I training occurs at regular
intervals, for all employees.

Companies can connect with Emotional Intelligence Leadership Consultants to
explore programs and training options for employees. The training process can be
improved over time when combined with employee interviews.

### Invitation

Maintaining a posture of invitation increases the likelihood of adoption of our
values. We believe that the attribution of wrongness, judgment, or fault when
sharing our values decreases the likelihood that our intentions are understood.

We invite you to fork this repository, and contribute.

---

[Return](emotional-intelligence.md)
